Hi, everyone. My name is Christian Simon and I'm going to be talking about continuous profiling.
So we heard a lot about observability today already and I'm going to want to introduce
maybe an additional signal there. So maybe quickly about me. So I'm working at Grafana
Labs. I'm a software engineer there and worked on our databases for observability. So I worked
on Cortex slash Mimir now. I worked on Loki and most recently I switched to the FLA team
and I'm 50% of the FLA team and we work on a continuous profiling database. There's not
going to be a particular focus on FLA today. So basically what I want to talk today is
kind of introduce how it's measured, what you can achieve with it and then maybe as
I learn more at the next first time I can go more into detail and yeah, like look at
a very specific language is there. So when we talk about observability, like what are
our common goals? Obviously we want to ensure that the user journeys of our users are successful,
that we maybe even can be proactively find problems before a user notices it. And like,
we want to be as quickly as possible when those problems happen to disrupt less of those
user journeys. And observability provides us like an objective way of getting some insights
into the state of our system in production. And even after a certain event has happened,
we found the roadway, reboot, and it's all up again. I think it might be able to help
us understand what exactly happened when we want to figure out the root cause of something.
So one of the, I guess, easiest and probably oldest observability signals is logs. So like,
I guess it starts with a kind of print hello somewhere in your code and I guess you probably
don't need a show of hands who's using it, like I guess everyone somehow uses logs or
is asleep if they don't show a hand. So basically like your application doesn't need any specific
SDK. It can probably just log based on the standard library of your languages. One of
the challenges, most of the time the format is rather varied. So like even in terms of
time stamps, it can be really, really hard to get a common understanding of your log
lines there. And also like when you then want to aggregate them, they are quite costly.
So like it spides, you need to convert them to ints, floats, and so on. And also something
that can happen is that you have so many logs that you can't find the ones that you're actually
interested in. So like a grab error, for example, could be, yeah, could be maybe helpful. But
also like there might be just too many errors. And you kind of lose the important ones. So
also like if you want to learn more about logs, my colleagues, Owen and Kavi, they're
going to speak about Loki, so definitely stay in the room. And I'm going to move on to the
next signal, so metrics. I'm also assuming pretty much everyone has come across them
and is using them. So in this case, you kind of avoid that problem I mentioned before.
You have the actual integers exposed. You maybe know about those integers that you care
about them. So to get a metric, most of the time you have to do some kind of the final
list of metrics you care about, and then you can collect them. So it might be you might
be having kind of an outage and didn't have that metric that you care about. And so you
need to kind of constantly improve on the exposure of the metrics. Obviously, like Pro
3 is the kind of main tool in that space. And very often we talk about web services,
I guess, when we think about those applications. So the red method, so like get the rate of
your requests, get the error rate of your request and get the latency duration of the
request can already cover quite a lot of cases. And obviously, like as it's kind of just integers
or floats, you can aggregate them quite efficiently across like, yeah, a multitude of pods or
like a really huge set up of services. And then if you get more into that kind of micro
services architecture that has kind of evolved over the last couple of years, you will find
yourself kind of having a really complex composition of services being involved in answering requests.
And so like you might even struggle to understand what's slowing you down or where the error
is coming from, why do I have this time out here? And distributed tracing can help you
a lot with kind of getting an understanding of what your service is doing. It also might
be that, like, maybe the service is actually doing way too much and you're calculating
things over and over again. So that is super helpful to get a bit more like the kind of
flow of the data in your system. So, like, the challenge there might be, like, you might
have a lot of requests. And while it's somewhat cheap to get the tracing, you might not cover
all the requests. So, for example, in our production system, I think maybe someone needs
to correct me if I'm wrong. But, like, when we receive a graphana cloud, like logs and
metric data, we only cover 1% of those with traces while we cover 100% of our queries.
So like, you need to make a selective decision if it's worth investing that. Like, obviously,
logs data looks always the same. It comes every second and so on. So, like, we see more
value in having all of those queries where there's a complex kind of caching and all
sorts of systems interacting with it. And so that allows us, yeah, to look a bit deeper
and even then find that one service that maybe is the bottleneck there. So maybe looking
at a bit of a real problem. So I'm having an online shop. I'm selling socks. And a user
is complaining about getting some time out when wanting to check out. That's obviously
not great because I'm not selling the socks. But at least the user got, like, some trace
ID and isn't complaining to our customer service. Then starting from there, I might figure out,
hmm, it's the location service that actually was the one that cost the time out in the
end. And then, like, looking at the metrics of the location service, I might find, oh,
like, there's actually 5% of the requests timing out. So maybe 5% of my users are not
able to buy their socks monthly or whatever. And so what are the next steps? I guess scaling
up is always good. So, like, maybe the service is just overloaded. The person that wrote
it left years ago. So we have no idea. So we just scale it up. Obviously it comes with
a cost. And so I think always the first thing would be fixing the bleeds, making sure no
more timeouts. So scaling up is definitely the right option here. But then if you do
that over years, you might suddenly find yourself having a lot more extra costs attached to
the location service. And so that's kind of where I think we need another signal. And
I think that signal should be profiling. So I guess most people might have come across
profiling. And it basically measures your code and how long it executes, for example,
what kind of bytes it allocates in memory. And it basically helps you maybe understand
your program even more or someone else's program in the location service case. So, and that
eventually can translate in, like, cost savings if you find out where the problem lies. Like,
you can maybe fix it or can get some ideas. Maybe you can also look at the fix and see
if it's gotten worse or better. And, yeah, like, that basically, like, gives you a better
understanding of how your code behaves. And so another question is how is, like, kind
of actually what is actually measured in a profile? So I created, like, a bit of a program.
I don't know. I hope everyone can see it. So it's basically like a program that has
a main function and then calls out other functions. So you can see, like, there's a do a lot and
there's a do little function and both of them then call prepare. So, and obviously in the
comments there's some work going on. And obviously the work could be allocating memory, like,
using the CPU, something like that. So let's say we use CPU. So when the function starts,
like we are first going to do something within the main, let's say we spend three CPU cycles,
which is not a lot. But that then gets recorded, like, yes, we took us three CPU cycles in
main. We then go into the prepare method through do a lot. Then we spend another five CPU cycles.
And those kind of stack traces then, they are recorded in the profile. And going through
the program, like, we will end up with that kind of measurement of stack traces. And while
it kind of works with ten lines of code, you can maybe spot where the problem is. Like,
there's the 20 and do a lot. It definitely, like, kind of breaks down when you're speaking
about, like, a lot of services or, like, a lot of code base that is happened or happens
to be hot and actively used. And so, like, there are a couple of ways of visualizing
them. I think one of the first things you would find is kind of a top table. So, like,
in that table, you can order it by different values. Like, so this is kind of an example
from Pprof, like, which is kind of the go tool. And you can see kind of clearly do a
lot is the method that comes out on top. And, like, there are now different ways how you
can look at the values. You have the flat count, which is the function itself only.
You can see the 20 that we had before. 20 CPU cycles. But we also have the cumulative
measurement which also includes the prepare that is going to get caught from do a lot.
And so, like, we already can see we spent 52% of our program in do a lot. So, maybe we
already can stop looking at the table and just look at do a lot. Because if we fix do
a lot or get rid of it, we need half of the CPU less. And that's that kind of it's kind
of represented by the sum. So, the sum will always change depending on how you order the
table in that particular example. So, in this case, like, we have 100% already at row number
four because we only have four functions. So, and to get a bit more of a visual sense
of what's going on, there are the so-called flame graphs. And I think the most confusing
thing for me about them was the colouring. So, obviously, like, red is always not great.
Should we look at main? No, we shouldn't. So, basically, like, the colouring, I think,
is random or uses some kind of hashing. And basically, it's only meant to look like a
flame. So, like, the red here doesn't mean anything. So, like, if you colour blind, that's
perfect for flame graphs. So, what we actually want to look at is this kind of, like, at
the leaf end is basically where the program would spend things. Like, you can see the
three CPU cycles main here. So, there's nothing below. So, main uses 100% through methods
that are called by main. And then there's nothing beyond this here. So, like, here we
spend something in main. And in the same way, in do little, we can see the five. And in
do a lot, we can see the 20 quite wide. And then the prepares with five each as well.
And now, obviously, if you look across a really huge program, you basically, like, can spot
kind of what's going on quite quickly. And then if you have, like, similar width, like,
root in main, like, you basically can ignore that, but it helps you maybe locate which
component of your program you want to look at. Because, like, maybe you're not good at
naming and you call everything prepare and you tell and it would still tell you roughly
where it gets called and how the program gets there. So, how do we get that profile? And
that can be kind of quite, there can be quite a lot of challenges how to get that. So, I
think I would say, like, there's, like, roughly two ways. Like, either your ecosystem supports
kind of profiles fairly natively. Then you instrument the profile, you add maybe a library
and an SDK. And, like, basically, like, the run time within your environment will maybe
expose the information. So, like, it's not available for all languages. There's, I guess,
a lot of work going on that it becomes more and more available. And the kind of other
approach is more like through an agent. And EPPF has been quite hyped. I'm not very familiar
with EPPF myself. I have used the agents but haven't written any code. But basically what
we would use, it would use an outside view of it. So, you wouldn't need to change the
binary running, really. Like, you would just, yeah, kind of look at the information you
get from the Linux kernel. Like, you hook into, I don't know, often enough when the
CPU runs to then find out what is currently running. So, there are different languages.
Like, for example, in a compiled language, you would be having a lot more information.
The memory addresses are the same. You can kind of use the information within the symbol
table to figure out where your program is and what is currently running. In, like, I
don't know, like an interpreted language like Ruby, Python, this might be a bit harder and
that information might not be accessible to the kernel without further work. Like, it
also, when you compile, you might drop the symbol tables, like, so that you really need
to kind of be preparing your application a bit for that. And then basically, like, yeah,
I want to look into the kind of prime example. I'm mostly a Go developer over the last couple
of years. So, Go has quite a kind of mature set of tools in that area. So, basically,
the standard library allows you to expose that information. It supports, like, CPU memory.
And especially garbage collected language. Memory is quite a thing to also non-garbage
collected languages. But memory is really important to understand the usage there. I
have a quick example of a program. So, you basically, like, just expose an HTTP port
where you can download the profile whenever you want. And you have that Pprof tool that
you can point to it. So, like, in that kind of first line example, you would just get
a two second long profile. So, CPU profile that looks at the CPU for two seconds. And
basically records, like, whatever is running, how long on the CPU. And then you get the
URL. And Pprof will allow you to visualize it through that table, for example. So, what
I forgot to mention as well. So, later, you can maybe go to that URL and look at that
profile that I had as an example. And in the same way, you can get the memory allocations.
And Pprof also allows you to launch an HTTP server to be a bit more interactive and select
certain code paths. So, that is, like, quite a lot in the Go docs, Go.dev about profiling.
So, I definitely leave it there. So, you can also look at kind of maybe if you are Go developer,
like, use that and play around yourself. But now I want to speak about why profiling might
be actually quite difficult. So, the example I had, like, I had three CPU cycles. And if
you think about it, that's not very much. So, and just to record what the program was
doing in those three CPU cycles probably takes, I have no idea, about thousands of CPU cycles.
And so, you really want to be careful what you want to record. So, if you really would
record all of that, like, your program would probably have, like, a massive overhead, would
slow down by profiling and behave completely different. And you also would have a lot more
data to store, to analyze. And then if you think about microservices and replica count
500, you might get quite a lot of data that is actually not that useful to you. Because
are you really caring about three CPU cycles? Probably not. And because of that, to allow
continuous profiling, to do that in production across, like, a wide set of deployments, like,
think Google were the first ones to do that, and they were starting to sample those profiling.
So, instead of looking at really every code that runs, Go, for example, looks 100 times
a second what is currently running on the CPU and then records it. And, obviously, maybe
like an integer adder will not be on the CPU if you don't run it all the time. And so,
you get a really accurate representation what is really taking your CPU time. And the way
that works, you also need to be kind of aware that, like, some things, the actual program
might not be on the CPU because it might be waiting for I.O. And so, like, when you kind
of collect a profile and the profile is not having that many seconds, you really need
to think about is this really what I want to optimise or maybe I'm not seeing what I
actually want to see. With that kind of statistical approach, like, I don't have any kind of sources
to say, but, like, I think generally you say that it's like a 2 to 3% overhead that gets
added on top of your program execution. So, that's, I guess, a lot more reasonable than
the full approach with recording everything. And so, what you generally kind of would do,
obviously, if you first need to ship your application somewhere and run it, then you
can look at the profiles. And, yeah, think about it, look at it, like, maybe you are
the owner of that code, maybe you have a bit more understanding and those profiles maybe
can give you a bit more of an idea of what you're actually doing there or how the system
is reacting to your code. And so, basically, like, for that green box, multiple solutions
exist. So, I'm obviously a bit biased, but I also have to say our project is fairly young
and evolving. So, for example, there's, like, CNCF-Pixie, EBPF-based, there's a polar signals
marker, like, people are in the room, and kind of our solution. I think they're all
great, like, you can all use them and start using them and exploring, like, maybe just
your benchmarks for a start. And then, as you get more familiar with it, like, you might
kind of discover more and more of the value there. So, I'm still going to use Flair now
for my quick demo. So, let me just see. So, I guess most of you are kind of familiar
with Grafana and Explore. Why is it so huge? And so, basically, that's kind of the entry
point you're going to see in the Explore. You have the kind of typical time range selection.
So, let's say we want to see the last 15 minutes now. And here we can see the profile types
collected. So, that's just a docker compose running locally on my laptop, hopefully, running
locally on my laptop since I started to talk. And, for example, we can hear look at the
CPU. So, that's kind of the nanoseconds on the CPU. And you can kind of see the flame
graph from earlier and maybe some bug. It looks a bit bigger than it usually should
be. But we can see that kind of top table. We can see the aggregation of all the services.
So, I'm running, like, five pods or something like that, different languages. So, you can
see, like, for example, this here is like a Python main module where it's doing some
prime numbers. So, what I first want to kind of break down here is by label. And that's
really the only kind of functionality that we have in terms of querying. So, here we
would look at the different instances. And we kind of see the CPU time spent, like, I
don't know, there's, like, a rust pod and they are both blue, so I don't know which
switch. But I guess flair is doing more. So, that might be the flair one. And for my example
now, I want to look at, yeah, just, like, a small program that I wrote to show, like,
how, like, the aspect. So, like, here we can see kind of the timeline. So, this is like
a profile gets collected, I think, every 15 seconds. And that's basically a dot. And then
the flame graph and the top table below would kind of just aggregate that. So, like, there's
no time component in here. That's also important to understand. And so, like, while we were
looking at memory, I'm now going to kind of switch to the allocated space. And here we
have some label selection, like, that you might be familiar. And this random pod here
you can see, like, the allocation, so the amount of memory that gets allocated is, like,
around 6 megabytes. But then every couple of every five minutes roughly, you can see,
like, some peak. And so, if you already look in the flame graph, there's already some kind
of big red box and the colors don't matter. But basically, like, you can see this kind
of piece of code is doing kind of majority of the allocations. And now you could even
kind of zoom in here if you really want to figure out, and then it even gets bigger.
You can see some more of what's going on. And so now, if you actually want to look at
the kind of code for this. And if flare is maybe in version 0.6, we could even see the
line of code that we should look at. Right now you can. But basically, like, it would
show us allocations in line 21. And I guess most of you can see what this kind of program
is doing. So every five minutes it will kind of have some peak of allocations. And you
only see that kind of because you have the time component, you can select it and then
see the flame graph aggregation. Cool. Yeah, that was almost my talk. Like, I have one
more slide that I should just quickly want to... So in the latest Go version 120, there
is profile guided optimizations. And I think that might be a really big topic. So what
it does, it looks at kind of your profile, and that can come from production or from
benchmarks or whatever, and tries to do the better decisions during compile time of what
things to do with your code like, for example, the only thing that it does right now is making
inlining decisions. But basically, like, if it sees this method is called a lot and is
in the hot path, it would then make the decisions to inline the method. Maybe if it's a bit
colder, it would not do it. And you can be a lot more accurate as a compiler if you have
that kind of data, if you know that method is in the hot path or not. Okay. That was
it.
Thank you. Thanks a lot. That was awesome. Questions? Thank you. Thank you for the talk.
Just wondering how would the profiling work with very multi-threaded code? Is there ability
to drill down into that level? Yeah. So, like, maybe, so, like, in terms of multi-threading,
like, obviously, we only have the main method in that example. So you can see root and then
mine is 100%. And, like, if it's multi-threaded, you would have kind of maybe more. So it's
basically only the stack trace that gets recorded. Like, you would not see kind of maybe the
connections where the thread is spreading off and things like that. You would get the
stack trace. Called stack. Have you looked into any other profiling formats than Bprof
ingestion? I know OpenTelemetry has been doing some stuff about introducing a profiling
format that people can standardize on, but I don't know if you've looked at that at all.
Yes. Can you, like, I haven't seen you. Like, sorry, can you repeat like I struggled to
do. So I was wondering if you've looked at any other profiling ingestion formats other
than Bprof? No. Like, right now we use Bprof personally with a bit of a flair. So I think
there's a lot of kind of improvements to be had over the format there. And that's, like,
as far as I know, some active work around OpenTelemetry to come to, I guess, a better
format in the sense to not send symbols over and over again and reduce interest. But, nah,
that's the accurate and short answer. So thank you for the talk. And my question
is that looking at the flair architecture, it's currently a pull model. So the flair
agent is scraping the profiling data from the applications that they configure it to
scrape. My question is, is there an eventual plan to also add maybe a push gateway or a
similar API for applications where this might be suitable? Yeah, like, definitely, like,
I think I also can see kind of the push use case for maybe if you want to get your micro
benchmarks from CI CD in. So, like, the API, in theory, allows it, but tooling is missing.
But I definitely think it's a valid, like, push use case as well. I think in terms of
scalability, I think pull will be better. But, yeah, I agree. Thanks for the talk. I
have a small question. Did you try to implement this tooling in the end of the CI, CD and
CO continuous optimization? No, like, so we're not using it yet for that. I think it's definitely
a super useful thing. Because, like, yeah, like, you want to see maybe how a pull request
behaves, like, maybe how your application allocates more or less in different parts.
And if the tradeoffs are right there. But, yeah, I think it definitely can and should
be used for that. But no tooling right now. Yeah, no, I fully agree as well. Yeah.
Hello. Thank you. So, if I understand correctly, profiles such as traces combined with OS metrics,
right? So, at a concrete specific time, we can see how much CPU you used and so on, right?
Yeah, I guess it looks a bit more at the actual line of code rather than, I don't know, I
haven't used, like, tracing where it automatically finds the function. Maybe that also tells
you the line of code. But, yeah, like, it definitely adds some metrics to it, like,
without you doing much, I guess, other than making sure it can read the simple tables
and the function names. Yeah. So, I just had, like, a dumb question or, like, dumb idea.
Couldn't you just combine, for example, you already have node exporter which exposes metrics
at all times? So, you have OS metrics and you have traces, for example. So, couldn't
you just have some kind of integration graphana or somewhere else that just combines traces
with metrics? Yeah, so, like, I think that was also the, like, people that worked longer
at continuous profiling software, they tried to kind of reuse Prometheus and I think where
you end up kind of in, it's just a very high cardinality. It's too many lines of codes
and that's kind of where it stops. But, like, in theory, like, I guess most PROMQL constructs
and functions are maybe something we need to implement on top of that in a similar way
because, yeah, you just get metrics out of it and so, basically, the problem was too
many lines of code, too much changing over time and, like, you just get too much serious
churn through that. So, thanks a lot. Yeah, thank you for coming.